# Dean's List Award appliance

Dear FTC Dean's List Award Judges,

I am honored to recommend Yiran Liu, or Sam, for the prestigious FTC Dean's List Award. Sam has been fulfilling the roles of team captain and chief programmer in Team 19581 *IRON MAPLE* since last year (2022). He has consistently demonstrated exemplary leadership, technical expertise, and remarkable dedication to the program. His contributions and impact on both our team and the FTC community are truly outstanding.



#### Joining the team

Sam joined our team, *IRON MAPLE*, in August 2022, just before his first year at this school began. I am almost certain that our robotics club had a significant impact on his decision to enroll in this school. While his classmates were still on summer holidays, he started coming to our training base, where he was taught to code for the robots. It was evident from an early stage that he possessed a genuine passion for robotics and a drive to excel in the FTC program.  After school started, the training base almost became a second home to this young engineer. He would come to our classroom during lunch break, club time, and even in the evening after school ended, every single day.



#### Qualities as a programmer

FIRST events have been cancelled throughout China during the past three years. This, as you can imagine, has a great impact to the team. New team members who joined the team last year never had a chance to learn from senior team members who participated in competitions before. The hardware group at least had my help, but Sam would have to start almost from zero, he would have to go through all the documents and videos to learn to code a robot. Luckily, his two-years experience in both Python and Java helped him quickly fit into the job as a programmer. I am not a programmer myself and it is hard to determine his ability at first, the first thing about him that I have noticed is his full-hearted dedication.  He has been sacrifisying nearly all of his free time to prepare for the matches. This is very treasurable, especially in consideration to the fact that programming is one of the most boring and pacience-demanded task in Robotics Competitions.  Later in the year, our team took part in several online events and off-seasons matches in FTC, as formal competitions were canceled due to the pandemic.  With almost no help from his seniors, Sam completed the robot's codes on his own, and in a level way higher than I expected.  An available tower-aiming function, an aggressive auto stage performance and a reliable chassis control is probably the best to expect from someone's first year.  His perseverance and hard-working shine through in his role of chief programmer, and helped our team a lot.  As a coach, such qualities are rarely seen for me, so I promoted him to the leader of our team by the end of the school year of 2022~2023. 



#### seeking to learn abroad

Before the start of the new season, I recommended Sam to go to a summer camp by Carnegie Melon University called Feiyue, where he can learn some experiences from the Americans. It was a summer camp intended to help new FRC paritcipants around the world by having them work with experienced mentors who are team members from local team 3504 "Girls of Steel" and team 4467 "Titanium Titans". The event lasted for two weeks, and apart from learning skills and knowledges, gaining inspirations and ideas is more important in my opinion.  Sam, for example, was deeply shocked by the vision-guided auto driving function of hyperion, the 2023 competition robot by 4467, and wanted to develop a similar system in his program.  But above all, the camp ignited the passion of the kid and he got obsessed with this competition. 


#### the new FRC season
Unlike other teams that have been actively preparing for the game since kick-off, our team would have to start in late January as winter vacation starts, that's when most of our members are free. Ofcourse, Sam have already been bussy making plans before that.  I can feel that the new task of leading the team is a huge pressure on Sam. Unlike programming, at which he already has sufficient experience that he can solve problems elegantly and smoothly, management is something beyond his current ability. But to me as mentor, the spirit of FIRST is to let my students explore areas new to them, try things that havn't tried before and seeking to learn throught this process. Lucky for the team, Sam is gruadually learning about the way of management. I am suprised to find out that he created some methods of his own. 
One of the innovations he made in team managing, is putting up a "task board".  It is a white board devided into three colums. On the first colum he wrote the macroscopic tasks of team, things like "construct the shooter module" or "code for the auto-gamepiece-approaching system". Below the first colum, leaders of each group write the specific tasks of their group and detailed steps to approach it, like"re-design the flywheels to 3cm thick", "replace the aluminium arm with carbon fiber". At the buttom, each individual team members write their plan for the day on a piece of paper and stick it to the white board.  This way, everyone will know what their goal is, what the goals of their group and the whole team are.  This new method is working significantly, team members are more focussed on their tasks and more moltivated. 

Apart from management, the programming itself is not an easy task either. The skills and experiences gained from a total of 5 competitions in the last year had given Sam huge confidence and ambition to build a control system way more advance than other robots. His intend, was to make the robot almost fully-autopiloted, capable of accomlishing intake, shoot, and amplify tasks all by its own, and the pilot only needs to tell it when to do it.  On the day after the kick-off day, he asked me to buy a Jetson-Nano(a micro AI-computer by NVIDIA, similar to Resberry Pi) and two usb cameras.  In the next two weeks, before other members of the team even got started, he completed coding his vision application with python. He said his program can recoginize both Game Pieces and Apriltags, measures their distance with trigonometry and post the datas through a web-server which can be visited by the RobotRIO through Ethernet. I don't know about the techinical details of this, but the fact the programmer could bring the vision program to live when the hardware group led by me haven't even got our framework built have once again shocked me.

As we are moving to Feburary, the machine is nearly finished.  Sam is starting to test his auto-aming function.  No doubt that this task would be a difficult one, but I am certain that Sam is ready for the challenge. To complete his program, he often stayed in the Club to late night, sometimes even go home on the next day.  The latested update in Feburary 7th, he successfully got the robot to automatically drive to the speaker, facing the target and shoot while it moves, with the pilot having to press only one= button to let the robot finish all these.  Now he is moving to the intake and amplify part, the process is looking good.

#### future plans

